Asia SentinelAsia Sentinel <https://www.asiasentinel.com/>
Subscribe

  * About <https://www.asiasentinel.com/about?utm_source=menu-dropdown>
  * Archive <https://www.asiasentinel.com/archive?utm_source=menu-dropdown>
  * Help
    <https://support.substack.com/hc/en-us?s=support%2Basiasentinel%40substack.com>
  * Log in
    <https://www.asiasentinel.com/account/login?redirect=%2Fp%2Fchina-seeks-regional-help-in-managing&email=&with_password=>


  China Seeks Regional Help in Managing Afghanistan


      Beijing, wary of jihadis, looks to Shanghai Cooperation Organization

Jul 21	

5 <javascript:void(0)>	
Comment

<https://www.asiasentinel.com/p/china-seeks-regional-help-in-managing/comments>

Share

<javascript:void(0)>


  Share

<https://cdn.substack.com/image/fetch/f_auto,q_auto:good,fl_progressive:steep/https%3A%2F%2Fbucketeer-e05bbc84-baa3-437e-9518-adb32be77984.s3.amazonaws.com%2Fpublic%2Fimages%2Faf3a3d10-0c67-408f-a349-6c458bb31c45_810x475.jpeg>

By: Salman Rafi Sheikh

With US and NATO forces having already largely withdrawn from
Afghanistan, and with the Taliban extending their control and quickly
approaching the Wakhan corridor in Badakhshan province that borders
China, it has become imperative for China to devise a concrete
Afghanistan policy.

That is because, according to some recent reports, Taliban groups
overrunning the province are not Pashtun, the dominant ethnic group in
the country. Rather they are overwhelmingly Tajik, Uzbek, Uyghur, and
Chechen fighters
<https://www.caspianpolicy.org/tajikistan-strengthens-border-as-afghan-and-tajik-officials-meet-to-discuss-regional-support-for-peace-talks/>,
which indicates a transnational jihadi formation taking place close to
China’s most sensitive regions.

Therefore, post-withdrawal Afghanistan, while good news for the Chinese
in terms of US disengagement from the Chinese backyard, is more of a
challenge at the moment than an opportunity to establish its economic
and financial tentacles in a country badly in need of money to rebuild
and reconstruct itself. In the wake of US withdrawal, China has been
forced to bring its citizens home and scale down its presence amid the
deteriorating security situation.

For China, engaging with Afghanistan has become important not only
because the US forces have withdrawn in an “irresponsible” manner,
allowing Islamist groups to gain control, but also because anti-China
groups like East Turkestan Islamic Movement (ETIM) continue to have a
strong presence. A Taliban resurgence, China believes, could allow the
ETIM to re-group and use its presence in Afghanistan to launch militant
attacks inside Xinjiang, China’s BRI hub, where China is reportedly
carrying mass “re-education” of the region’s Uyghur Muslim majority.

As such, while the Donald Trump administration had removed the ETIM from
its terror list in November 2020 saying that the group did not have any
credible presence and/or posed a direct threat to China, a recent UNSC
report confirmed that not only does the group have a substantial
presence in Afghanistan and continues to pose a direct threat to China
as well, but it has developed alliances with other jihadi networks as
well in pursuance of its broad objectives.

To quote the report
<http://cdn.cnn.com/cnn/2020/images/06/01/n2011060.pdf>: “...the Eastern
Turkistan Islamic Movement is located mainly in Badakhshan, Kunduz and
Takhar Provinces. Abdul Haq (QDi.268) remains the group’s leader, aided
by his deputy Kausali. According to one Member State, Farooq in Paktika
Province is the group’s logistics chief, Shoaib in Uruzgan Province is a
senior operative and Hamza and Abdussalam in Paktika Province are
religious leaders.

“Approximately 500 fighters of the group operate in the north and
north-east of Afghanistan, primarily in Raghistan and Warduj Districts,
Badakhshan, with financing based in Raghistan. According to one Member
State, the Eastern Turkistan Islamic Movement collaborates with
Lashkar-e-Islam and Tehrik-e-Taliban Pakistan. The Member State reported
that the Eastern Turkistan Islamic Movement has a transnational agenda
to target Xinjiang, China, and the China - Pakistan Economic Corridor,
as well as Chitral, Pakistan, which poses a threat to China, Pakistan,
and other regional States.”

Given the direct threat that large-scale instability poses to China, its
Afghanistan policy has already evolved to adopt a “regional
approach.” To the extent that the presence of numerous jihadi groups
warrants such an approach, China has become a lot more sensitive due
precisely to the way the civil war and the resurgence of Islamist groups
in Afghanistan can upend the BRI. At least four of six ‘Silk Roads’ of
China’s BRI emanate or pass through Xinjiang, connecting China with a
number of member states of the Shanghai Cooperation Organization, the
Eurasian security pact, including Pakistan and other Central Asia
states; hence, China’s invocation of the SCO as the most suitable
platform to resolve the Afghan question.

In a recent meeting of the SCO, China proposed a five-point agenda
<http://www.chinese-embassy.org.uk/eng/zgyw/t1892261.htm> to help
Afghanistan transit from the 20 years of war into a politically and
militarily stable position without posing a direct threat to regional
states.

China’s five points include: 1) a continued US role and responsibility
in resolving the crisis, 2) preventing the resurgence of transnational
terror networks (read: the ETIM), 3) the SCO members must play a more
direct role in facilitating an “Afghan-led and Afghan-owned” process of
reconciliation, 4) the SCO must also utilize multilateral mechanisms of
cooperation, 5) and the SCO must actively seek to integrate Afghanistan
with “regional economic development.”

The fact that China is seeking to actively include the SCO shows that,
unlike the past, Beijing is reluctant to rely solely on Pakistan for
managing and protecting its interests in Afghanistan. Whereas the
complexity of the Afghan problem itself warrants such a policy, China’s
policy also speaks volumes about its growing differences with Pakistan
with respect to Pakistan’s handling of the enormously expensive
China-Pakistan Economic Corridor over the past three years and its
increasing inability to prevent terror attacks on Chinese personnel in
Pakistan. Last week, at least nine Chinese engineers working on Dasu Dam
were killed in a terror attack in Khyber Pakhtunkhwa (KPK) province.

By establishing direct ties with the Taliban, and by activating the SCO,
China wants to make sure that a political transition does take place in
Afghanistan without the Afghan state melting down under the combined
weight of war between Kabul and the Taliban on the one hand, and the war
between numerous jihadi networks based in Afghanistan looking to expand
their reach beyond Afghanistan.

China’s direct investments in Afghanistan notwithstanding, it seems that
China, like other regional states, is not averse to extending legitimacy
to and cultivating direct relations with the Taliban in exchange for
their guarantees for not providing support and sanctuaries to
non-Taliban Islamist groups.

This being said, it remains to be seen whether the Taliban will actually
divorce the transnational jihadi networks. For now, regional states,
including China, continue to bank upon the Taliban’s apparent desire to
be embraced as a legitimate political force.

/*Salman Rafi Sheikh* is a Pakistani academic and a longtime Asia
Sentinel correspondent/

------------------------------------------------------------------------


          This article is among the stories we choose to make widely
          available. If you wish to get the full Asia Sentinel
          experience and access more exclusive content, please do
          subscribe to us.

*Subscribe*

5 <javascript:void(0)>	
Comment

<https://www.asiasentinel.com/p/china-seeks-regional-help-in-managing/comments>

Share

<javascript:void(0)>


  Share

← Previous
<https://www.asiasentinel.com/p/us-allies-pile-pressure-on-china>Next →
<https://www.asiasentinel.com/p/malaysias-premier-political-party>


    Create your profile

Set photo

Sign up for the newsletter

Save & Post Comment


    Only paying subscribers can comment on this post

Subscribe
<https://www.asiasentinel.com/subscribe?simple=true&next=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.asiasentinel.com%2Fp%2Fchina-seeks-regional-help-in-managing&utm_source=paywall&utm_medium=web&utm_content=39014031>
Already a paying subscriber? *Log in*
<https://www.asiasentinel.com/account/login?redirect=%2Fp%2Fchina-seeks-regional-help-in-managing&email=&with_password=>


        Check your email

For your security, we need to re-authenticate you.

Click the link we sent to , or click here to log in
<https://www.asiasentinel.com/account/login?redirect=%2Fp%2Fchina-seeks-regional-help-in-managing&email=&with_password=1>.

TopNewCommunityWhat is Asia Sentinel?
<https://www.asiasentinel.com/about>About
<https://www.asiasentinel.com/about><javascript:void(0)>
South Vietnam’s Flags at the Capitol Riot
<https://www.asiasentinel.com/p/south-vietnams-flags-at-the-capitol>What
was the flag of an extinct state doing amid the carnage?
<https://www.asiasentinel.com/p/south-vietnams-flags-at-the-capitol>
	Jan 9	

3 <javascript:void(0)>	
Comment

412
<https://www.asiasentinel.com/p/south-vietnams-flags-at-the-capitol/comments>

Share

<javascript:void(0)>


  Share

Malaysia Fades in Covid Fight
<https://www.asiasentinel.com/p/malaysia-fades-in-covid-fight>Competing
companies, tardy procurement, low signup rates plague country
<https://www.asiasentinel.com/p/malaysia-fades-in-covid-fight>
John Berthelsen <https://www.asiasentinel.com/people/30131-john-berthelsen>
Apr 16	

11 <javascript:void(0)>	
Comment

182 <https://www.asiasentinel.com/p/malaysia-fades-in-covid-fight/comments>	
Share

<javascript:void(0)>


  Share

Malaysian Premier Stages Daring Move to Stay in Power
<https://www.asiasentinel.com/p/malaysian-premier-stages-daring-move>Mahathir
engineers coup to block onetime protégé Anwar
<https://www.asiasentinel.com/p/malaysian-premier-stages-daring-move>
Feb 23, 2020	

8 <javascript:void(0)>	
Comment

<https://www.asiasentinel.com/p/malaysian-premier-stages-daring-move/comments>

Share

<javascript:void(0)>


  Share

See all <https://www.asiasentinel.com/archive?sort=top>


  Ready for more?

*Subscribe*

© 2021 Asia Sentinel. See privacy
<https://www.asiasentinel.com/privacy>, terms
<https://www.asiasentinel.com/tos> and information collection notice
<https://substack.com/ccpa#personal-data-collected>

Publish on Substack
<https://substack.com/signup?utm_source=substack&utm_medium=web&utm_content=footer>
Asia Sentinel is on Substack – the place for independent writing
This site uses cookies. To find out more, read our privacy policy
<https://www.asiasentinel.com/privacy#cookies> ✖ Close
